---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Progression of Japanese Technology
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2018-01-19
labels:
  - Javascript
  - JSFiddle
  - Software Engineering
---

Naryssa Fia

ICS 314

Professor Johnson

January 19, 2018

A Reflection on Javascript

  Prior to the experiences and tasks over the course of the past week, I had no experience with Javascript. There were some striking differences between Javascript and the programming languages I am already familiar with. The Workout of the Day (WOD) was quite a unique experience. The idea of athletic software engineering behind the WOD is a completely new approach to learning a new programming language.
    
   As mentioned, Javascript is a completely new language to me. At first, it was expected that there would be some similarities between Java and Javascript. However, after experiencing the lessons from freecodecamp.com Javascript, Javascript is very different from Java. The lack of a main() function, the way functions and variables are declared were very much, unexpectedly, different from what was expected. To add on to experiencing these differences, learning how to work JSFiddle was another challenge. There were some issues with the site freezing unexpectedly while performing practice WODs at home. 
    
   As for the WODs themselves, the practice at home a couple days before the in-class WOD was very helpful for adjusting to the pressure of writing code while on a timer. The experiences with the WODs, in class and at home, helped to hone my ability of envisioning how to write code given a problem. Typically, my methodology is a bit slower, I weigh my options and routes with the code. Granted the WODs are smaller problems, but the timer helped to push me to move through this thought process faster. Although it was stressful at first, it came out to be very beneficial.
    
   Overall, the experiences with Javascript were very unique and beneficial. The practice of athletic software engineering is not commonly executed in other programming classes, and is very stressful. But the practice does help to hone a programmer’s thought process. Also, the freecodecamp.com lessons helped to give a short and sweet introduction to the language. 
